I think we're ready to go hello each and
every one of you my name is Jay I'm one
of the expert IELTS teachers at e2
language in this live class we're gonna
do something I think is really important
we're gonna look at IELTS speaking we're
going to look at pronunciation and we're
going to practice the 44 sounds of
English that's right there are 44 sounds
in English like Doug Fir sir we're gonna
go through them all what I want you to
do in this live class is identify which
sounds you are particularly weak at I
want you to improve them because
pronunciation accounts for 25% of your
grade in IELTS speaking in other words
it's really important plus it's just
good to be able to pronounce all of
these 44 sounds accurately anyway
in your job on the street wherever you
use English so people won't be
frustrated or strained to understand you
it's just a good thing in life to be
easily understood ok language is just
that beautiful thing that allows us to
be understood by other people and the
sounds we make are the little vehicles
that allow that cool so let's get
started first thing I just want to talk
to you about is IELTS speaking how its
scored ok this crazy-looking document
here is what the IELTS examiner is
looking at on test day if you've taken
the IELTS before you notice that while
you're doing the speaking the IELTS
examiner will be sitting there listening
to you but also noting something down
what is he or she noting down well it's
this they're looking at this in
particular they're listening for four
things okay so this is an IELTS 9 this
is an IELTS 8 7 6 et cetera this one is
about your fluency and coherence in
other words how smoothly you speak this
one's about vocabulary this one's about
your grammar and this one here is
your pronunciation this is what we're
gonna look at in this lesson
pronunciation and we're going to look at
how to get that nine score okay so I alt
nine pronunciation well technically this
is what the IELTS examiner's are looking
at you use a full range of pronunciation
features with precision and subtlety
this is confusing this is what it means
simply so to get an IELTS 9 in
pronunciation you can say all 44 sounds
of English accurately you can say all 44
sounds easily in other words you are
effortless to understand you are
effortless to understand what does that
mean well here I've made a bit of a
chart what I think this is based on the
IELTS core criteria we just looked at so
let's break it down
so in IELTS 8 to 9 is what could be
considered to be native like in other
words you are effortless to understand
it's just you say something to me and I
don't have to sort of interpret it I
don't have to say huh I just immediately
register what you say because your
pronunciation is accurate that is
effortless easy that's what this that's
the stage you want to get to get to
Bravo next one advanced well that's sort
of like yep very good very good I got
sure I understand you next one will be 6
to 7 years good it's sort of like ok
yeah yeah I understand you but maybe
some of the words some of the sounds
you're saying are incorrect fine
5 to 6 is like what what's that sorry
I'm misunderstanding you because it's
unclear because maybe you're
mispronouncing quite a few of those 44
sounds then we get down to the quiet the
low score of the four to five and that's
seriously like sorry I don't understand
you can you say that again and finally
if you're a zero to four it's like what
I don't understand you at all so let's
have a look at those 44
in spoken English we're going to go
through them part by part because we've
got consonants like the dirt sir
Murr Turks etc we've got short vowels
yeah we've got long vowels like AE I
we're gonna go through all 44 sounds and
I know this might seem a little bit
silly or juvenile or childish I want you
to repeat after me when we do this okay
and I want you to sort of reflect upon
your own pronunciation and try to
identify which sounds you are
mispronouncing or not hitting exactly
because you want to hit those sounds
exactly and if you're not getting them
please try and do something to rectify
it to fix it so let's start with the 19
consonant sounds this is what we're
gonna look at and the way we're gonna do
this is this we're gonna start with the
sound I'm gonna show you how to do it
I'm gonna go buh buh buh buh and I want
you to look at my mouth but but then
we're gonna do some practice words then
we'll go to the next sound and the next
sound do stick around I know this might
get a bit tiresome but it's gonna start
easy then it's gonna become harder so
stick around here we go so we'll start
with bow ready
BRR BRR BRR BRR fine
so we've got ball ribbon ball ribbon
next we got derp derp derp derp derp
derp we've got dog add filled dog add
filled then we got fer fer fer fer fer
fer fer my teeth I just on my lip fer
fer fer fer so we've got words like fan
cliff phone laughs calf off
you can hear that foot foot foot sound
let's go through them again fan cliff
phone laugh cough often and you can see
the crazy spelling of English it's still
the same sound it's still the same foot
foot foot sounds but here we have what
like a pH for phone laugh at the end of
the word
LF calf it's all making this sound here
next one go this is really coming from
the sort of lower throat area good good
good good good
so we've got words like grapes egg ghost
guest catalog grapes egg ghost guest
catalog cool next one let's have a look
at this sound here this is the hot sound
ha ha ha ha hat whoo hat whoo next one
Jay Jay Jay Jay Jay Jay Jay right at the
front of the mouth that Joe Joe Joe Joe
where it's like jelly caged giraffe edge
soldier exaggerated jelly cage giraffe
edge soldier exaggerated next one we've
got Kirk Kirk Kirk these are pretty
common ones by the way you probably have
these in your language some of you may
not
let's keep going cook cook cook cook
cook
so kite cat chrome acclaim
Queen back box folk cat chrome acclaim
Queen back box folk now by this stage
you're probably freaking out because
there's so many different ways to spell
that could sound spelling aside what I
want to focus on is the just the sound
trying to get the cook cook cook cook
cook sound right yes there are various
ways to spell Kerr for example the queue
or the seal whatever it is but that's
beside the point
just focus on the sound cook cook cook
cook let's keep going this one our south
sorry sitar but he's at East Asians
Koreans Japanese usually struggle with
look-look-look-look
this come this one's like my tongue is
just behind my top teeth going look look
my tongue actually hits my top teeth
look look look look look
with like love for example or words like
leaf leaf leaf spell spell spell it's
not sparrow it's not wreath it's leaf
and spell kill next one here we go
getting through the consonants now this
one let's start with uh uh uh uh
upma this is just lips
map map map map map map ma monkey monkey
monkey summer summer summer
climb-climb-climb autumn autumn autumn
pom pom pom mah mah mah next one nah nah
nah nah nah nah nest nest nest funny
funny funny night night night NAT
NAT NAT pneumonia pneumonia pneumonia
now this is very rare these are very
rare usually the note sound will come
from these types of letters or even this
is very rare usually it's just these two
next one yeah no no no no no no comes
from my throat no no no and it sounds
like this ring ring ring or sink sink
sink or Tong Tong Tong again this is
very rare
next one per but it's just purely lips
and you're shooting air out you should
be out of feel on your hand
purr purr puts almost like you're
spitting air so words like pig pig it's
not burp it's not big it's pig pig pig
happy happy happy
cool second last one here we go what do
we got we got rah rah rah rah rah
such as robot robot robot carrot carrot
carrot wrong wrong wrong rhyme rhyme
rhyme next one
sir sir sir sir Sir sir
such as Sun Sun Sun miss miss miss
Circus Circus Circus rice rice rice I
just should stop there because a lot of
Vietnamese speakers in some Southeast
Asian speakers struggle to hit the final
s for example I hear Vietnamese speakers
say rye
I eat rye no it's rice rice you have to
get the sir sir or the the number six
it's not stick sick
it's six six six that final s makes all
the difference to my understanding of
what you're saying without that s sound
the word is unclear you must even if it
feels very strange and you feel weird
doing it practice it make it become
normal to you or feel normal
cool horse horse horse science science
science psychology psychology psychology
listen listen listen
cool next one tur tur tur tur tur tur
tur tur tur words like
tap-tap-tap batter batter batter Thomas
Thomas Thomas and interestingly past
tense verbs like mapped mapped mapped
mapped it's almost like saying map to
map mapped mapped mapped next one Indian
speakers and South Asians Bangladeshis
Pakistanis this is a big problem for you
guys you need to hit the verb not work
it's not work there's no rounding of the
mouth this is purely bottom lip on top
teeth saying okay words like Van Van Van
Van or of-of-of or name like Steven
Steven Steven or number five five five
cool these are the last three consonants
so this is the one that South Asians mix
up here's that what what okay let's do
this one web web web why why why
quick quick quick choir choir choir so
that's the word sound next one yah yah
yah yah yah yah yah yah yah such as yo
yo yo yo yo yo or opinion opinion
opinion
yah yah yah yah last consonant sounds
it's not sir sir-sir
it's Z such as zebra zebra zebra buzz
buzz buzz
cheese cheese cheese has has has
scissors scissors scissors xylitol
xylitol xylitol maze maze maze cool nice
so they are the consonants we've just
gone through how many was there 18 I
believe 18 I think
consonant sounds so that's usually
letters of the alphabet like Coeur MO
now we're going to look at five
consonant combination sounds remember
we're doing 44 in total we've done 18
let's keep going five consonant
combination sounds here are the five
consonant combinations
the first one is zsa zsa zsa zsa zsa zsa
zsa zsa mic strangely my bottom lip goes
down zsa zsa zsa
here it is words like treasure treasure
treasure or division division division
next one sure sure sure sure sure sure
sure
words like shark shark shark ocean ocean
ocean conscience conscience conscience
sure sure sure
station station station special special
special tension tension tension machine
machine machine cool let's do
choo choo choo choo choo choo words like
cheese cheese cheese or watch watch
watch a future future future or
questions-- questions-- questions-- or
righteous righteous right choo chess
righteous okay these are really
problematic for a lot of type different
language backgrounds so it's t hate t
hate words like you think vs. said that
now there are two types I'm gonna talk
you through the two types
this first one is my tongue is below my
two top teeth and there's no sound
through my throat it's purely coming
from my teeth in the air the second one
this one here like feather the the the
the is different because I can feel it
in my throat the the the the the the the
okay so let's do the first one whoops so
words like think think think think think
it's not sink sink sink it think think
think
I'm blowing the air between my teeth and
my tongue the think think think think
and the next one is the one that I make
the sound in my throat like feather film
that the the the the feather they are
two really critical ones you may want to
practice those ones they seem to be very
problematic for a lot of different
language backgrounds okay cool
nice now we're on to the six short vowel
sounds okay so here are all of the six
short vowel sounds the first one is ah I
should remind you that every single word
in English has a vowel so you have to
get these sounds right because these
sound these sounds like ah ah are in
every word so if you're missing one
imagine the effect or the impact that
that has on your pronunciation in other
words you have to get all six of these
accurate precise okay let's do the first
one
so Cat Cat Cat Cat Cat Cat Cat Cat next
whoops sorry let me tell my phone off
you shouldn't hear my messages yeah yeah
yeah
words like egg egg egg egg or bread
bread bread or leopard leopard leopard
or berry berry berry or heifer heifer
heifer or friend friend friend or said
said said or many many many many next
one words like igloo igloo igloo or
England England England or sieve sieve
sieve or women women women or busy busy
busy
or build build build or hypnotize
hypnotize
ize e-e-e next 100 words like orange
orange orange or Swan Swan Swan or
honest honest honest next one
uh-uh-uh-uh-uh-uh
words like mug mug mug or monkey monkey
monkey or flood flood flood or trouble
trouble trouble then finally for these
short vowel sounds this one I sound like
a bit of a monkey when I do this
words like book book book or Bush Bush
Bush or could could could or
woof-woof-woof cool nice we're getting
there so we've got 15 long vowel sounds
left for our 44 so let's go through each
of these these ones are probably quite
unique to English this is where it
starts to get difficult these
combination or long vowel sounds let's
go through some of them so you know what
I mean
first one is ay-ay-ay-ay-ay
words like snail snail snail or baby
baby baby or vein vein vein or wait wait
wait or gauge gauge gauge or straight
straight straight or this one is when
you have the a here and the e at the end
like cake or bake or make or wake a a a
a a or let's do this one hey hey break
break croquet croquet they they let's
look at this one here this is e long e
e-e-e-e
EEE words like b-b-b me-me-me brief
brief brief seat seat seat ski ski ski
lady lady lady receive receive receive
key key key people people people Phoenix
Phoenix this is very rare by the way
very rare Phoenix and this is extremely
rare you hardly ever see this maybe a
couple of words in English key key key
but still it's the long e sound next one
ai ai ai ai ai ai ai ai words like
spider spider spider fly fly fly aisle
aisle aisle night night night island
island island pi PI pi
height height height bye bye bye here
we've got the I website and the e that I
and the eat kite kite kite
Rai Rai Rai and the fourth one here long
o sound long o like oh oh oh oh
words like boat boat boat here we have
the O and the e at the end like bone
bone bone
buh-buh-buh open open open broach broach
broach toe toe toe so so so lo lo lo
though though though there's the long
earth sound cool 5 6 7 & 8 here we go so
this is the sound ooh ooh what like moon
moon moon
screw screw screw fruit fruit fruit blue
blue blue this is the U and E at the end
words like flute flute flute or mute
mute me I no no no actually mute
different so it will get to mute this
one's very rare in fact I'm not gonna do
it
shoo shoo-shoo through through through
next one this is the u sound that like
mute so this is the you-you-you yeah
yeah you words like uniform uniform
uniform you you you beauty beauty beauty
few few few view view view Feud Feud
feud alright I realize this is quite
exhausting I'm getting tired doing this
we've only got a few more to do ok so
let's get to the end of the 44 then in
your own time I want you to go back and
practice this in your own time with
every single sound to identify the ones
that you're mispronouncing because it's
this is the only way to improve is to
dig down to this depth to look at those
44 sounds ago you know what I'm
mispronouncing four of these I need to
work on the work sound for example you
need to do the hard work to find that
out by the way if you don't want to do
the hard work you can't always just sign
up for a paid package of e to language
comm meet with the teacher like me
online have a one-on-one tutorial on
speaking and let us identify your
weaknesses which will make it a lot
easier do you think about going to eat
language comm by the way let's finish
this here we go now this one's a bit of
an Australian one oi oi this is a real
Aussie sound by the way oi oi oi oi oi
words like coin coin coin or boy boy boy
ow
now out next one ow ow ow
words like cow cow cow shout shout shout
bow bow bow
this one is a knod sound this is kind of
like an uh it's almost like a short
vowel sound ladder let's just do this
one here
so words like ladder ladder ladder
Dola Dola Dola cactus cactus cactus
honor honor honor
Agha Agha auger doctor doctor doctor
Center center Center dolphin dolphin
dolphin ticket ticket ticket changed a
little bit there I apologize
alright how many have we got left I want
to have a look okay that's it we've got
two more here we go ten eleven and
twelve let's do this is the air air air
air so long vowel sound like air yeah
yeah yeah yeah
words like chair chair chair square
square square or pear pear pear or where
where where or there there there or
prayer prayer prayer then we've got our
our our now here's a bit of a difference
between American English and say
Australian English in Australia we take
car car car and we sort of missed the r
R sound whereas Americans tend to go our
our like I have a red car car car
but Australians say car car car so I'll
do this sort of neutral in between okay
so we've got
car car car actually I'm gonna this is
Americans would say bath but L do
Australian bath bath bath laughs laughs
laughs sergeant sergeant sergeant heart
heart heart let's do these ones again in
Aussie sort of accent car car car bath
bath bath laughs laughs laughs sergeant
sergeant sergeant heart heart heart this
one's uh it's like two valves put
together Oh like that so we've got words
like bird bird bird or term term term or
burn burn burn or pelt
Oh Oh word word word or journey journey
journey last one ladies and gentlemen
let's finish this on a high we got 13 14
and 15 or or or or or or here we go
words like pour pour pour ball ball ball
four four four fork fork fork tort tort
tort door door door war war war more
more more bored bored bored bored bored
bored sauce sauce sauce iya iya iya iya
iya iya words like here here here steer
steer steer here here here Pia Pia Pia
yeah yeah yeah last one here we go
Kyra you are you are you are you are you
are you are so words like kya kya kya
tourists tourists tourists actually this
one's a bit different I apologize that's
not quite it
anyway oh my god we've just done the 44
sounds of English that's all of them now
as I said you're probably thinking how
will I possibly remember all of these
well we saw a lot of different ways that
you would spell the sound so we sort
like you know like or like this one here
for example the whoops this sound here
or has 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 different
ways to spell it but it's just the one
sound so the spelling is separate from
the sound just get the sound right 44 of
them we just did them all really good
practice if you go and do them again
feel free to share this video by the way
if you think it's helpful cool
um fine let's do something else let's
talk about word stress because this also
impacts your pronunciation what do I
mean by words dress well have a look at
these three ways to say this word here
now I want you to tell me which way is
correct
is it a photograph e photograph e with
an emphasis or stress on photo and then
no stress on graph E or is be correct
photography photography photography with
an emphasis on the top top top or EC
correct photograph E photograph E
photograph E so just type into the chat
which is correct a B or C photograph E
photography or photograph E let's have a
look at what you've got here
drum roll and yes most of you have got
it right I'll show you the answers at
the end let's do this one considerably
considerably considerably considerably
considerably or considerably consider
ugly you can see how different the word
sounds where we place the stress or how
we split that word up is it considerably
considerably I can't even do B B's just
forget B or is it C considerably
considerably which is right let's do
number three is it democracy democracy
sorry sorry sorry I can't say it's hard
to do is it democrasy democrasy
democracy or is it be democracy
democracy with emphasis on the MA sound
or is it C democracy democracy democracy
so is it democracy democracy or
democracy democracy massive differences
in the way that you say these words
depending on where you place the
emphasis on the sound so number four is
an argument argument or is it argument
argument argument or is it C argument
argument are you meant what about number
five is it curriculum curriculum
curriculum or is it curriculum
curriculum curriculum or is it
curriculum curriculum curriculum last
one number six is it information sorry
information information information is
it information information information
or is it C information information
information let's have a look at these
answers the answers of this number one
would be photography photography
photography and you can hear that I'm
emphasizing the top top top photography
photography photography considerably
considerably considerably I think I
mispronounced that one wrong I apologize
emphasis here consider
considerably especially on this sound
democracy democracy democracy argument
argument argument you can hear that it's
almost like big emphasis here and then
this trails off here argument argument
its curriculum curriculum curriculum and
it's information information information
this it's difficult it's subtle it's
very subtle but you can hear the
difference it makes if you say this
incorrectly
basically if you put the stress on the
wrong sound in the word I'm going to
have trouble understanding what you're
saying because if you say to me J I'm
really good at fotografia I think what
photograph e but then it will take me an
instant and I'll go art photography I
understand what you mean so that word
stress a word emphasis is is really
critical to to being understood
effortlessly right let's do some
practice we've done a lot of looking at
all the different individual parts of
sounds and the 44 sounds and the long
vowels in the short vowels in the
consonants blah blah blah blah blah
let's just do some practice of reading
aloud
I think this by the way reading
something aloud is probably one of the
best ways to improve your pronunciation
so let's play a little game what we're
going to do is I'm going to give you 30
seconds to read through this complicated
paragraph and then 30 seconds again to
read through it again so your 30 seconds
starts now
to practice reading through this
okay let's I'm gonna read it once and
then I want you to read after me okay so
here we go I'm gonna read it through the
remains of a majestic female statue
uncovered at an archaeological site in
southeast Turkey may challenge our
understanding of the public role of
women in the ancient world excavations
at a site near the Syrian border have
unearthed a beautifully carved head and
upper torso of a female figure
the remnants are largely intact okay
let's do it again it's your turn
all of the 44 sounds of English maybe
not all of them but most of them are in
this paragraph here we go read it one
more time as clearly as you possibly can
starting now
cool let's do another one
I'll read it first and then you read it
the combination of a bacterium that
normally lives in the gut and a protein
rich diet promotes a more tolerant less
inflammatory gut immune system according
to new research the findings in mice
suggest a way to tilt the gut immune
system away from inflammation
potentially spelling relief for people
living with inflammatory bowel disease
your turn I want you to hit all of those
sounds of English hit them accurately
here we go
your turn in three two one start
you
[Music]
cool and one more this one's gonna be
hard this one's long you have to read it
perfectly here we go
I'll go first whoops I'll move my little
thing here hold on here I'll read first
and then you read ready humans and most
other vertebrate animals died within a
few minutes without oxygen
yet goldfish in their wild relatives
crucian carp can survive for days even
months in oxygen free water at the
bottom of ice-covered ponds during this
time the fish are able to convert
anaerobically produce lactic acid into
ethanol which then diffuses across their
gills into the surrounding water and
avoids a dangerous buildup of lactic
acid in the body well maybe it takes
more than 30 seconds right your turn
ready read this one I'll give you 30
seconds but don't worry if you go over
three two one start
cool letsa excuse me let's have a look
at these words because all of the sounds
are here here yeah yeah yeah
ma ma sir Sir hey ma ma ma oh oh stir
stir stir ah there's that there's that
the the the with the voice remember that
one the the la da da da here's the verb
so a lot of as I said a lot of Indian
Pakistani Bangladeshi speakers have
problems with the vertebrates
vertebrates not were to prett
vertebrates no no no no no vertebrate
vertebrate so we looked at the 44 sounds
of English that's all there is there are
no more there are only 44 you need to
get them all right in order to get an
IELTS well for that particular part of
speaking anyway the pronunciation to get
an isle to 9 in pronunciation you need
to be able to say all 44 sounds
accurately and easily to not struggle it
requires practice if you need help by
the way if any of your speaking I
suggest that you check out this website
if you're not already on this website
watching this e to language comm if you
need help with the IELTS speaking do
check it out now I'm gonna go to Q&A and
we'll do a little bit of QA and I'll
stop my recording there